Advanced backend configuration via JSON (#569)
openPMD/openPMD-api: docs/source/details/backendconfig.rst

.. _backendconfig

> Backend-specific configuration

Reviewer: English titles:
```suggestion
Backend-Specific Configuration
```

==============================

> While the openPMD API intends to be a backend-*independent* implementation of the openPMD standard, it is often necessary to pass configuration parameters to the concrete backend in use. Some backends recognize a number of configuration options via environment variables (see the backends' documentations), the preferred way to do so, however, *– as far as it is implemented –* is via a JSON-formatted string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the openPMD API intends to be a backend-*independent* implementation of the openPMD standard, it is sometimes useful to to pass configuration parameters to the specific backend in use.
:ref:`For each backend <backends-overview>`, configuration options can be passed via a JSON-formatted string or via environment variables.
A JSON option always takes precedence over an environment variable.
```

The fundamental structure of this JSON configuration string is given as follows:

> .. literalinclude:: config_layout.json

Reviewer: Follow-up PR: can we add a [schema](https://json-schema.org/) for this?

Author: Probably a good idea, yeah

This structure allows keeping one configuration string for several backends at once, with the concrete backend configuration being chosen upon choosing the backend itself.

> The configuration is currently read in a case-sensitive manner. Since this may change in the future, all parts of the configuration are given in *lower case*. Parameters that are directly passed through to an external library and not interpreted within the openPMD API (e.g. ``adios2.engine.parameters``) are unaffected by this and follow the respective library's conventions.

Reviewer: One sentence per line please:
```suggestion
The configuration is read in a case-sensitive manner.
Generally, keys of the configuration are *lower case*.
Parameters that are directly passed through to an external library and not interpreted within openPMD API (e.g. ``adios2.engine.parameters``) are unaffected by this and follow the respective library's conventions.
```

> The configuration string may refer to the complete ``openPMD::Series`` and additionally be specified per ``openPMD::Dataset``, passed in the respective constructors. *Configuration per dataset is currently not yet implemented.* This reflects the fact that certain backend-specific parameters may refer to the whole Series (such as storage engines and their parameters) and others refer to actual datasets (such as compression).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration string may refer to the complete ``openPMD::Series`` or may additionally be specified per ``openPMD::Dataset``, passed in the respective constructors.
*A configuration per dataset is currently not yet implemented.*
This reflects the fact that certain backend-specific parameters may refer to the whole Series (such as storage engines and their parameters) and others refer to actual datasets (such as compression).
```

For a consistent user interface, backends shall follow the following rules:

* The configuration structures for the Series and for each dataset should be defined equivalently.
* Any setting referring to single datasets should also be applicable globally, affecting all datasets.
* If a setting is defined globally, but also for a concrete dataset, the dataset-specific setting should override the global one.

> * If a setting is passed to a dataset that only makes sense globally (such as the storage engine), the setting should be ignored except for printing a warning. Backends should define clearly which keys are applicable to datasets and which are not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If a setting is passed to a dataset that only makes sense globally (such as the storage engine), the setting should be ignored except for printing a warning.
  Backends should define clearly which keys are applicable to datasets and which are not.
```

> Configuration structure per backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuration Structure per Backend
```

.. _backendconfig

> Backend-Specific configuration

Reviewer: Titles:
```suggestion
Backend-Specific Configuration
```

==============================

While the openPMD API intends to be a backend-*independent* implementation of the openPMD standard, it is sometimes useful to pass configuration parameters to the specific backend in use.
:ref:`For each backend <backends-overview>`, configuration options can be passed via a JSON-formatted string or via environment variables.
A JSON option always takes precedence over an environment variable.

The fundamental structure of this JSON configuration string is given as follows:

.. literalinclude:: config_layout.json

> 

Reviewer: Not sure if this will be already nicely highlighted, otherwise add:
```suggestion
   :language: json
   
```

*A configuration per dataset is currently not yet implemented.*
This reflects the fact that certain backend-specific parameters may refer to the whole Series (such as storage engines and their parameters) and others refer to actual datasets (such as compression).

For a consistent user interface, backends shall follow the following rules:

* The configuration structures for the Series and for each dataset should be defined equivalently.
* Any setting referring to single datasets should also be applicable globally, affecting all datasets.
* If a setting is defined globally, but also for a concrete dataset, the dataset-specific setting should override the global one.
* If a setting is passed to a dataset that only makes sense globally (such as the storage engine), the setting should be ignored except for printing a warning.
  Backends should define clearly which keys are applicable to datasets and which are not.

Configuration Structure per Backend
-----------------------------------

ADIOS2
^^^^^^

A full configuration of the ADIOS2 backend:

.. literalinclude:: adios2.json

> 

Reviewer: See above, if needed:
```suggestion
   :language: json
   
```

Author: I already applied the same fix to the documentation of the JSON backend.

> All keys found under ``adios2.dataset`` are applicable globally as well as per dataset, keys found under ``adios2.engine`` only globally. Explanation of the single keys:

Reviewer: One sentence per line:
```suggestion
All keys found under ``adios2.dataset`` are applicable globally as well as per dataset, keys found under ``adios2.engine`` only globally.
Explanation of the single keys:
```

The configuration string may refer to the complete ``openPMD::Series`` or may additionally be specified per ``openPMD::Dataset``, passed in the respective constructors.
*A configuration per dataset is currently not yet implemented.*
This reflects the fact that certain backend-specific parameters may refer to the whole Series (such as storage engines and their parameters) and others refer to actual datasets (such as compression).

For a consistent user interface, backends shall follow the following rules:

* The configuration structures for the Series and for each dataset should be defined equivalently.
* Any setting referring to single datasets should also be applicable globally, affecting all datasets.
* If a setting is defined globally, but also for a concrete dataset, the dataset-specific setting should override the global one.
* If a setting is passed to a dataset that only makes sense globally (such as the storage engine), the setting should be ignored except for printing a warning.
  Backends should define clearly which keys are applicable to datasets and which are not.

Configuration Structure per Backend
-----------------------------------

> ADIOS2

Reviewer: Generally, and I think this can be a follow-up PR as well, I think these backend-specific options should go into the respective backend docs page (where we also document the current environment vars).

Reviewer: @franzpoeschel please try to split this up in a follow-up PR, we already have backend-specific docs where this should go :)
